.\" This file is licensed under the BSD\[hy]3\[hy]Clause license.
.\" See the AUTHORS and LICENSE files for more information.
.Dd August 28, 2015
.Dt ZFSNAP 8
.Os \" Current operating system.
.
.Sh NAME
.Nm zfsnap
.Nd create and delete rolling ZFS snapshots
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl V
|
.Ar <command>
.Op options
.Ar zpool/filesystem ...
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
creates and deletes rolling ZFS snapshots \[em] usually with cron.
.Nm Ap s
main advantages are its portability and that all information needed for
snapshot management is kept in the snapshot name itself.
.Pp
zfsnap snapshots are in the format of pool/fs@[prefix]Timestamp\-\-TimeToLive
.Pq e.g. zpool/var@monthly\-2010\-08\-03_02.06.00\-\-1y .
.Pp
The prefix is optional and is quite useful for filtering; Timestamp is the date
and time when the snapshot was created; and TimeToLive (TTL) is the amount of
time the snapshot will be kept until it's ready for deletion.
.
.Ss Top\[hy]level Options
The majority of functionality is implemented at the
.Ar <command>
layer. However, a few options can be passed to
.Nm
directly.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h
Print a summary of
.Nm Ap s
command\[hy]line options and then exit.
.It Fl V
Print the version number and exit.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
operates only on snapshots and will
.Em never
destroy or create a pool or filesystem.
.
.Sh Commands
Most
.Nm
actions are performed by using a
.Ar <command> .
All options and arguments passed to a
.Ar <command>
are operated on as they are read
.Pq i.e. sequentially .
This provides the flexibility needed for complex scenarios, but also has the
capacity to bite you if you're not paying attention. Remember,
.Fl n
.Pq dry\[hy]run
is provided for a reason.
.Pp
Only one
.Ar <command>
can be passed per invocation of
.Nm .
.
.Ss destroy
By default,
.Nm Cm destroy
will only delete snapshots whose TTLs have expired. However, options
are provided to override that behavior with more aggressive approaches.
.Pp
Only snapshots created by
.Nm
.Pq or, more specifically, snapshots which match the very specific name pattern it employs
will be considered for deletion.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl D
Delete all zfsnap snapshots \[em] regardless of their TTL expiration \[em] on
all ZFS file systems that follow this option.
.It Fl F Ar age
Force delete all snapshots exceeding
.Ar age
.Pq defined in TTL format
\[em] regardless of their TTL expiration \[em] on all ZFS file systems that
follow this option. See
.Sx TTL SYNTAX
for more information.
.It Fl h
Print a summary of
.Cm destroy Ap s
command\[hy]line options and then exit.
.It Fl n
Dry\[hy]run. Perform a trial run with no actions actually performed.
.It Fl p Ar prefix
Enable filtering to only consider snapshots with
.Ar prefix ;
it can be specified multiple times to build a list.
.It Fl P
Disable filtering for prefixes.
.It Fl r
Operate recursively for snapshots on all ZFS file systems that follow this
option.
.It Fl R
Do not operate recursively for snapshots on all ZFS file systems that follow
this option.
.It Fl s
Skip pools that are resilvering.
.It Fl S
Skip pools that are scrubbing.
.It Fl v
Verbose output.
.El
.
.Ss recurseback
.Nm Cm recurseback
is different from `zfs rollback` in that it will rollback for not only the
specified dataset, but also for all that dataset's children.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d Ar depth
Limit the recursion to
.Ar depth .
A
.Ar depth
of 1 will rollback only the dataset and its direct children.
.It Fl f
Typically used with the
.Op Fl R
option to force an unmount of any clone file systems that are to be destroyed.
.It Fl h
Print a summary of
.Cm recurseback Ap s
command\[hy]line options and then exit.
.It Fl n
Dry\[hy]run. Perform a trial run with no actions actually performed.
.It Fl r
Destroy any snapshots and bookmarks more recent than the one specified.
.It Fl R
Destroy any snapshots and bookmarks more recent than the one specified, as well
as any clones of those snapshots.
.It Fl v
Verbose output.
.El
.
.Ss snapshot
The purpose of
.Nm Cm snapshot
is simple: to create snapshots.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a Ar TTL
How long the snapshots should be kept. If not declared, the default
.Ar TTL
is one month. See
.Sx TTL SYNTAX
for more information.
.It Fl h
Print a summary of
.Cm snapshot Ap s
command\[hy]line options and then exit.
.It Fl n
Dry\[hy]run. Perform a trial run with no actions actually performed.
.It Fl p Ar prefix
Prefix to apply when naming snapshots for all ZFS file systems that follow this
option.
.It Fl P
Don't apply any prefix when naming snapshots for all ZFS file systems that
follow this option.
.It Fl r
Create recursive snapshots of all ZFS file systems that follow this option.
.It Fl R
Create non\[hy]recursive snapshots for each ZFS file system that follows this
option.
.It Fl s
Skip pools that are resilvering.
.It Fl S
Skip pools that are scrubbing.
.It Fl v
Verbose output.
.It Fl z
Round snapshot creation time down to 00 seconds.
.El
.
.Sh TTL SYNTAX
The Time\[hy]To\[hy]Live
.Pq TTL
contains numbers and modifiers. Valid modifiers are:
.Bl -tag -width 8n -offset 4n
.It Ar y
years
.Pq calendar
.It Ar m
months
.Pq calendar
.It Ar w
weeks
.It Ar d
days
.It Ar h
hours
.It Ar M
minutes
.It Ar s
seconds
.It Ar forever
a special\[hy]case modifier that will never expire and cannot be used with other
TTL modifiers. Both
.Op Fl F
and
.Op Fl D
will delete snapshots with a TTL of
.Ar forever .
.El
.Pp
You do not need to use all of the modifiers, but they must be used in the above order
.Pq i.e. sequentially .
.Pp
TTL numbers must be greater than zero and cannot have leading zeros
.Po e.g. Both
.Ar 0y
and
.Ar 09d
are invalid
.Pc .
.Pp
The default TTL is
.Ar 1m
.Pq one month .
.
.Ss TTL Math
When a TTL is added to a date, each field is added independently, then any month
overflows are carried into years, and then all overflows are carried normally
from right to left.
.Pp
For example, with a date of 2009\-02\-27 and a TTL of
.Ar 1m3d ,
the expiration date is 2009\-03\-30 rather than 2009\-04\-02.
.Pp
As a corner case, adding a TTL of
.Ar 1m
.Pq one month
to the date 2009\-10\-31 will result in an expiration date of 2009\-12\-01
rather than 2009\-11\-30. Because there are only 30 days in November, precisely
one month after October 31st is ambiguous. The TTL math chooses the more conservative
.Pq later
result.
.
.Ss TTL Examples
.Bl -tag -width 8n
.It Ar 1y6m5d2h
One year, six months, five days, and two hours
.It Ar 18m
Eighteen months
.It Ar 90M
Ninety minutes
.It Ar 86400s
Eighty\[hy]six thousand and four hundred seconds
.Pq 1 day
.El
.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
exits 0 on success and 1 if an error occurs.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Nm
was designed to work with cron. Thus, some of these examples will include cron
markup.
.Pp
Every hour, create recursive snapshots of an entire pool and keep for 5 days.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Minute  Hour  Day  Month  Day  Who   Command
5         *     *    *      *    root  /sbin/zfsnap snapshot \-a 5d \-r zpool
.Ed
.Pp
Create snapshots of different datasets in different zpools and keep for 2 weeks.
.Pp
.Dl zfsnap snapshot \-a 2w zpool2/git zpool2/jails \-r zpool2/jails/main zpool1/var
.Pp
Note that
.Op Fl a ,
.Op Fl r ,
and
.Op Fl R
can be used many times in a single line.
.Pp
Now, for a more complex example. Here,
.Nm
will snapshot
.Bl -dash -compact -offset 2n
.It
zpool/var recursively and hold it for 1 year
.It
zpool/home recursively and hold it for 6 minutes
.It
zpool/usr recursively and hold it for 3 months
.It
zpool/root non\[hy]recursively and hold it for 3 months.
.El
.Pp
.Dl zfsnap snapshot \-a 1y \-r zpool/var \-a 6M zpool/home \-a 3m zpool/usr \-R zpool/root
.Pp
Deleting ZFS snapshots is much slower than creating them, and it's usually not
a problem if snapshots live a few hours longer. Thus, it is usually best to
delete old snapshots once a day.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Minute  Hour  Day  Month  Day  Who   Command
0         1     *    *      *    root  /sbin/zfsnap destroy \-r zpool
.Ed
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cron 8 ,
.Xr zfs 8 ,
.Xr zpool 8
.Pp
The zfsnap website is available at
.Lk http://www.zfsnap.org
.Pp
Please report any bugs to
.Lk https://github.com/zfsnap/zfsnap/issues
.Pp
General questions and discussion can be directed to our mailing list at
.Mt zfsnap@librelist.com
.Pq gmane.comp.sysutils.zfsnap on gmane .
.
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was created by
.An -nosplit
.An Aldis Berjoza ,
.Mt graudeejs@yandex.com ,
and is co\[hy]maintained with
.An Alex Waite
.Mt alex@waite.eu .
See the AUTHORS file for more information.
.
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.Nm
is released under the
.Qq BSD\[hy]3\[hy]Clause License.
See the LICENSE file for more information.
.
